---
layout: post
title:  "gem5-21.2 Released!"
author: Bobby R. Bruce
date:   2021-12-28
categories: project
---

We are proud to announce version 21.2 of the the gem5 project.
In this release we incorporated 790 commits from 33 unique authors, new and regular, from both academia and industry.
We are, as always, thankful to all the time our community puts into maintaining and improving gem5.

## 21.2 Highlights

### Enhanced Standard Library

Having existed since v21.1 under the now deprecated name "the components library", the v21.2 release of gem5 moves the gem5 standard library out of alpha.
The purpose of the gem5 standard library is to provide gem5 users a standard set of commonly used components and utilities to aid them in their research.
Our overarching goal with the standard library is to remove "boilerplate" code from gem5 configuration files;
making the 95% of activities that rarely change from simulation-to-simulation available in an "off-the-shelf" manner to users.
As an example, a users wishing to experiment with the effects of cache sizes can used the gem5 standard library to setup a processor, memory system, and test on sensible benchmarks, thus freeing them to focus completely on the impact of cache size changes.

The gem5 standard library is a provided as Python package which contains the following:

* **Components**: A set of Python classes which wrap gem5's models.
Some of the components are pre-configured to match real hardware (e.g., `SingleChannelDDR3_1600`) and others are parameterized.
Components can be combined together into `boards` which can be simulated.
* **Resources**: A set of utilities to obtain and incorporate resources (disk images, applications, kernels, etc.) into gem5 simulations.
Using this module allows you to _automatically_ download and use many of gem5's prebuilt resources (e.g., kernels and disk images) from [gem5-resources](https://www.gem5.org/documentation/general_docs/gem5_resources).
* **Simulate**: Used to interface with gem5's simulation/run capabilities.
**Note: This package is in beta.
Expect API changes to this package in future releases.
Feedback is appreciated.**
* **Prebuilt**: These are fully functioning prebuilt systems (`boards`) to use directly in gem5 simulations with minimal setup.
This release includes an [X86 demo board](https://gem5.googlesource.com/public/gem5/+/refs/tags/v21.2.0.0/src/python/gem5/prebuilt/demo/x86_demo_board.py) and an [example of how it may be used](https://gem5.googlesource.com/public/gem5/+/refs/tags/v21.2.0.0/configs/example/gem5_library/x86-ubuntu-run.py).

**Note:** Usage of the gem5 standard library is optional.
It does not change any established gem5 API, or how gem5 configuration scripts may be created.
gem5 configuration scripts that functioned in v21.1 should continue to function in v21.2.
We do, however, hope the gem5 library can aid users in creating simulations, as is the case with all libraries.

Users can find example configurations scripts that incorporate the gem5 standard library in the gem5 repository's [`configs/example/gem5_library`](https://gem5.googlesource.com/public/gem5/+/refs/tags/v21.2.0.0/configs/example/gem5_library) directory.

As an example of how simple the gem5 standard library can make running a gem5 simulation, consider the following script:

```python
from gem5.prebuilt.demo.x86_demo_board import X86DemoBoard
from gem5.resources.resource import Resources
from gem5.simulate.simulator import Simulators

# Here we setup the board. The prebuilt X86DemoBoard allows for Full-System X86
# simulation.
board = X86DemoBoard()

# We then set the workload. Here we use the 5.4.49 Linux kernel with an X86
# Ubuntu OS. If these cannot be found locally they will be automatically
# downloaded.
board.set_kernel_disk_workload(
    kernel=Resource("x86-linux-kernel-5.4.49"),
    disk_image=Resource("x86-ubuntu-18.04-img"),
)

# We then setup the Simulator and run the simulation.
simulator = Simulator(board=board)
simulator.run()
```

This script can be executed with

```sh
scons build/X86/gem5.opt
./build/X86/gem5.opt <script>
```

The script will automatically obtain the correct linux kernel and a disk image containing Ubuntu 18.04 from gem5-resources (if not already present on the host system).
It will then run a full-system X86 simulation to a complete boot of the operating system, then exit.
Prior to the introduction of the gem5 standard library, a user would have to put in considerable effort to build such a simulation (100s of lines of python).

While we hope we have designed the standard library in an intuitive manner, users may reference the source under [src/python/gem5](https://gem5.googlesource.com/public/gem5/+/refs/tags/v21.2.0.0/src/python/gem5).

In the coming month we will be updating the gem5 website with new tutorials and documentation on using the gem5 standard library.

#### Future work on the gem5 standard library

Over the next few gem5 releases we will be expanding the standard library to include more components and features.
An big goal of ours is to provide prebuilt components and systems that are proven to be representative of real-world counterparts.

The `Simulate` module [will be expanded, improved, and moved out of beta state](https://gem5.atlassian.net/browse/GEM5-1125) as its role in the gem5 standard library becomes more clear.

If you wish to report a bug in the gem5 standard library or have a feature request, please submit it to gem5's [Jira site](https://gem5.atlassian.net/).
Questions regarding usage of the standard library can be made to the [gem5 user's mailing list](https://lists.gem5.org/postorius/lists/gem5-users.gem5.org/).

### LupIO: Friendly IO Devices for gem5.

LupIO devices were developed by [Prof. Joel Porquet-Lupine](https://faculty.engineering.ucdavis.edu/porquet) as a set of open-source I/O devices to be used for teaching.
They were designed to model a complete set of I/O devices that are neither too complex to teach in a classroom setting, or too simple to translate to understanding real-world devices.
A goal of two undergraduate students at UC Davis, Melissa Jost and Laura Hinman, was to work on incorporating LupIO devices into gem5.
As such the gem5 v21.2 release includes a LupIO real-time clock, a random number generator, a terminal device, a block device, a system controller, a timer device, a programmable interrupt controller, and an inter-processor interrupt controller.

A more detailed outline of LupIO can be found in Prof. Porquet-Lupine's paper ["LupIO: a collection fo education-friendly I/O devices"](https://luplab.cs.ucdavis.edu/assets/lupio/wcae21-porquet-lupio-paper.pdf) and information on the wider LupLab research group can be found on [their website](https://luplab.cs.ucdavis.edu/).

Users wishing to try out LupIO devices can find an example script and README file in the [`configs/example/lupv`](https://gem5.googlesource.com/public/gem5/+/refs/tags/v21.2.0.0/configs/example/lupv) directory.

**Note:** These LupIO devices have been built and tested for RISC-V.
However, there is no reason these couldn't be modified to work with other ISA targets if required or desired.
We welcome further development by the gem5 community.

### Arm improvements

In continued and welcome collaboration with Arm Holdings, improvements to gem5 Arm implementations have been made.
They are:

* [Improved configurability for Arm architectural extensions](https://gem5.atlassian.net/browse/GEM5-1132): We have improved how  architectural extensions are enabled/disabled for an Arm system.
Rather than working with independent boolean values, we now use a unified `ArmRelease` object which models the architectural features supported by a FS/SE Arm simulation.
* [Arm TLB can store partial entries](https://gem5.atlassian.net/browse/GEM5-1108): It is now possible to configure an `ArmTLB` as a walk cache which stores intermediate PAs obtained during a translation table walk.
* [Implemented a multilevel LB hierarchy](https://gem5.atlassian.net/browse/GEM5-790): Users can now compose/model a customizable multilevel TLB hierarchy in gem5.
The default Arm MMU now has an Instruction LA TLB, a Data L1 TLB, and Unified (Instruction + Data) L2 TLB.
* [Provided an Arm example script for the gem5-SST integration](https://gem5.atlassian.net/browse/GEM5-1121).

### GPU Improvements

Continued efforts by, primarily, AMD, Inc. and the University of Wisconsin have improved gem5's GPU support.
In this release:

* **Vega support**: gfx900 (Vega) discrete GPUs are now both supported and tested with [gem5-resources applications](https://gem5.googlesource.com/public/gem5-resources/+/refs/heads/stable/src/gpu/).
* **Additional GPU applications**: The [Pannotia graph analytics benchmark suite](https://github.com/pannotia/pannotia) has been added to gem5-resources, including Makefiles, READMEs, and sample commands on how to run each application in gem5.
* **Regression Testing**: Several GPU applications are now tested as part of the nightly and weekly regressions, which improves test coverage and avoids introducing inadvertent bugs.
* **Minor updates to the architectural model**: Small changes and fixes have been made to the HSA queue size (to allow larger GPU applications with many kernels to run), and the TLB (to create GCN4- and Vega-specific TLBs). We have also added new instructions that were previously unimplemented in GCN4 and Vega, and fixed corner cases for some instructions that were leading to incorrect behavior.

### gem5-SST bridge revived

In recent versions of gem5, we sadly lost the ability to integrate with the [Structural Simulation Toolkit](http://sst-simulator.org) (SST).
In collaboration with the SST community, we have revived support for connecting gem5 cores to the SST memory system.
In v21.2 release, this has been tested for RISC-V and Arm.
More information on setting up and running gem5 with SST can be found in [`ext/sst/README.md`](https://gem5.googlesource.com/public/gem5/+/refs/tags/v21.2.0.0/ext/sst/README.md).

## New/Changed APIS

* **[API CHANGE]**: All `SimObject` declarations in SConscript files now require a `sim_objects` parameter that lists all SimObject classes declared in that file which need C++ wrappers (that is, SimObject classes which have a `type` attribute defined).

* **[NEW CHANGE]**: There is now an optional `enums` parameter for `SimObject` classes which must list all the Enum types defined in that SimObject file.
Technically, this should only include Enum types which generate C++ wrappers though, as of v21.2, all Enums do so.

## Other v21.2 improvements

* The master/slave terminology has been removed.
This has been an on-going effort for several gem5 releases.
The gem5 codebase is now free of its usage.
* Arm v8.2-A FEAT_UAO has been implemented.
* [The "at" variants of the file system call have been implemented in SE mode](https://gem5.atlassian.net/browse/GEM5-1098).
* The SConscripts have been refactored for improved modularity.
* New "tester" CPUs have been introduced which mimic GUPS.
