---
layout: post
title:  "The Case for Using Guix to Solve the gem5 Packaging Problem"
author: Christopher Batten<sup>1</sup>, Pjotr Prins<sup>2</sup>, Efraim Flashner<sup>2</sup>, Arun Isaac<sup>2</sup>,Ekaiz Zarraga<sup>2</sup>, Erik Garrison<sup>2</sup>, Tuan Ta<sup>1</sup>
date:   2022-05-23
categories: project
---

<sup>1</sup> School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY <br>
<sup>2</sup> The University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN <br>
<sup>3</sup> ElenQ Technology

This post will first describe the gem5 packaging problem before making
the case for using Guix, a mature functional cross-platform package
manager, for building, distributing, installing, and managing the gem5
ecosystem.

The gem5 Packaging Problem
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

The gem5 simulator has become the defacto standard for cycle-level
simulation, and gem5 now supports evaluating a diverse set of workloads.
Unfortunately, both the gem5 simulator and gem5 workloads still lack a
compelling software packaging solution to simplify building,
distributing, installing, and managing the gem5 ecosystem. In this
section, we describe the gem5 simulator and workload packaging problems
before sketching an ideal software packaging solution.

**The gem5 Simulator Packaging Problem --** The gem5 simulator is a
complex piece of software with numerous build- and run-time dependencies
including a modern C++ compiler, SCons, Boost, and Python. To mitigate
dependency issues, the gem5 installation instructions strongly recommend
using specific versions of Ubuntu. The gem5 simulator has numerous
compile-time options to experiment with different ISAs, coherence
protocols, and/or accelerators, and this in turn makes providing a single
precompiled binary difficult. Even so, the gem5 community does point new
researchers to a small number of precompiled Docker images. Given these
challenges, the gem5 community has chosen not to support any kind of
packaging for the gem5 simulator. Almost all researchers individually
manage dependencies and recompile the gem5 simulator from source.

**The gem5 Workload Packaging Problem --** Building workloads to run on
the gem5 simulator using syscall emulation can be just as challenging as
building the gem5 simulator itself. These workloads must be
cross-compiled meaning researchers must build a complete
cross-compilation toolchain for each target architecture. Researchers
might also need to build an emulator (e.g., QEMU) to test these workloads
before moving to cycle-level simulation. Researchers must ensure the
workloads only use static libraries and do not call any unsupported
syscalls. Given these challenges, the gem5 community directly included
precompiled binaries as part of the gem5 source distribution for many
years. More recently, the community has migrated to pre-compiled binaries
as part of the gem5 resources project.

An ideal software packaging solution would be: _reproducible --_ easily
duplicate precisely specified development environments; _transparent --_
understand entire development environment including exact build
configuration and version of every dependency; _composable --_ easily
integrate the gem5 simulator and workload into standard development
environments without needing cumbersome, heavyweight containers; _fast --_
leverage precompiled packages; _distribution agnostic --_ enable
researchers to use the Linux distribution of their choice; _unified --_
same packaging solution can be used for both the gem5 simulator and
workloads; _portable --_ easily build gem5 workloads for native execution
and/or target multiple ISAs for cycle-level simulation without manually
managing multiple cross-compilation toolchains; and _flexible --_ easily
switch between development environments, modify existing packages, add
new packages, produce reproducible workflows, and/or generate containers.

## Using Guix for gem5

Guix is a mature functional cross-platform package manager with hundreds
of committers and over 20K packages. In this section, we briefly describe
our on-going efforts to use Guix for packaging both the gem5 simulator
and gem5 workloads.

**Using Guix to Package gem5 Simulators --** We have developed a
proof-of-concept Guix package for the gem5 simulator that handles all
build- and run-time dependencies and installation[^1]. The package builds
gem5 for six ISAs, ensures builds are reproducible by eliminating
non-deterministic use of `|__DATE__|` and `|__TIME__|`, patches the build
environment to work with SCons, and performs a well-structured install of
the gem5 simulator binaries and example configurations. The package is:
_reproducible_ through the use of isolated and deterministic
environments for experimenting with the gem5 simulator; _transparent_,
since the complete recursive dependency graph is precisely specified;
_composable_, since the gem5 simulator is installed just like any
other tool without the need for a container; and _distribution
agnostic_, since the package can be installed on Ubuntu, RHEL, SUSE, or
even Guix System which is an entire distribution based exclusively on
Guix. Derived packages could enable easily providing packages for
different compile-time configurations. When merged upstream into the main
Guix package repository, this package will be part of the Guix build farm
enabling binary package substitution for _fast_ installation.

**Using Guix to Package gem5 Workloads --** Guix already includes
packages for QEMU and cross-compilation toolchains for commercial ISAs.
We are contributing to the RISC-V port of Guix including packaging the
RISC-V cross-compilation toolchain. We identified a simple Smith-Waterman
sequence alignment Guix package as an interesting gem5 workload and
developed a derived Guix package that patches the standard build process
to produce a statically linked binary[^2]. In addition to being
_reproducible_, _transparent_, _composable_, and _distribution agnostic_,
using Guix is also _portable_, since we can easily cross-compile the
package for ARM or RISC-V, and _flexible_, since it requires only eight
lines of Guile code to create a new derived package supporting static
compilation.

## Case Study

The attached appendix describes step-by-step commands for a case study
that: installs QEMU, gem5, and cross-compilers for x86, ARM, and RISC-V
in an isolated environment; cross-compiles and runs Smith-Waterman for
all three ISAs; and runs this benchmark on the in-order and out-of-order
timing models. To reproduce this case study, a researcher first must
download and install Guix[^3].

### Add new channel

By default, Guix includes its own main package repository, but users can
also create their own ``channels'' that include third-party packages. We
need to add such a channel to get access to the gem5 simulator package
and the derived Smith-Waterman package.

     % cd $HOME/.config/guix
     % cat > channels.scm \
    <<'END'
    (use-modules (guix ci))
    (list
     (channel
      (name 'gn-bioinformatics)
      (url (string-append "https://git.genenetwork.org/"
             "guix-bioinformatics/guix-bioinformatics.git"))
      (branch "master"))
     (channel-with-substitutes-available
      %default-guix-channel "https://ci.guix.gnu.org"))
    END

### Update Guix and install Smith-Waterman

We use `guix pull` to download all of the package descriptions from the
main package repository along with any third-party packages. We then
install the default Smith-Waterman package and run it natively. Here we
use the default "profile", but we could also install this package in a
dedicated Guix "profile", similar to Python's virtual environment.

    % mkdir -p $HOME/tmp/misc/test-guix
    % cd $HOME/tmp/misc/test-guix
    % guix pull
    % guix install smithwaterman
    % smithwaterman -p TGATTGTACCAAA TGATCATGTACCA

### Install QEMU and gem5

We now install both the QEMU and gem5 packages for all architectures in
the same profile.

    % guix install qemu
    % guix install gem5

### Build and run Smith-Waterman for x86_64 ISA

We use `guix build --target=x86_64-linux-gnu` to cross-compile
most Guix packages for x86_64. Here we cross-compile the derived package
for Smith-Waterman which produces a statically linked executable that we
then run on both QEMU and gem5.

    % cd $HOME/tmp/misc/test-guix
    % DIR=$(guix build \
             --target=x86_64-linux-gnu smithwaterman-static)
    % ln -sf $DIR/bin/smithwaterman sw-x86_64
    % qemu-x86_64 ./sw-x86_64 -p TGATTGTACCAAA TGATCATGTACCA
    % gem5-x86.opt \
        $GUIX_PROFILE/share/gem5/configs/example/se.py \
        --cmd=./sw-x86_64 \
        --options="-p TGATTGTACCAAA TGATCATGTACCA"

### Build and run Smith-Waterman for ARM ISA

We use `guix build --target=aarch64-linux-gnu` to cross-compile
most Guix packages for ARM. Here we cross-compile the derived package for
Smith-Waterman which produces a statically linked executable that we then
run on both QEMU and gem5.

    % cd $HOME/tmp/misc/test-guix
    % DIR=$(guix build \
             --target=aarch64-linux-gnu smithwaterman-static)
    % ln -sf $DIR/bin/smithwaterman sw-aarch64
    % qemu-aarch64 ./sw-aarch64 -p TGATTGTACCAAA TGATCATGTACCA
    % gem5-arm.opt \
        $GUIX_PROFILE/share/gem5/configs/example/se.py \
        --cmd=./sw-aarch64 \
        --options="-p TGATTGTACCAAA TGATCATGTACCA"

### Build and run Smith-Waterman for RISC-V ISA

We use `guix build --target=riscv64-linux-gnu` to cross-compile
most Guix packages for RISC-V. Here we cross-compile the derived package for
Smith-Waterman which produces a statically linked executable that we then
run on both QEMU and gem5.

    % cd $HOME/tmp/misc/test-guix
    % DIR=$(guix build \
             --target=riscv64-linux-gnu smithwaterman-static)
    % ln -sf $DIR/bin/smithwaterman sw-riscv64
    % qemu-riscv64 ./sw-riscv64 -p TGATTGTACCAAA TGATCATGTACCA
    % gem5-riscv.opt \
        $GUIX_PROFILE/share/gem5/configs/example/se.py \
        --cmd=./sw-riscv64 \
        --options="-p TGATTGTACCAAA TGATCATGTACCA"

### Run experiment on RISC-V ISA

Once we have used Guix to install the gem5 simulator and the gem5
workload packages, we can easily perform a computer architecture research
experiment. Here we compare the performance of running Smith-Waterman on
an in-order vs.~out-of-order RISC-V processor model.

    % cd $HOME/tmp/misc/test-guix

    % gem5-riscv.opt \
        --outdir=m5out-minor-sw \
        $GUIX_PROFILE/share/gem5/configs/example/se.py \
        --cmd=./sw-riscv64 \
        --options="-p TGATTGTACCAAA TGATCATGTACCA" \
        --cpu-type=MinorCPU --ruby

    % gem5-riscv.opt \
        --outdir=m5out-o3-sw \
        $GUIX_PROFILE/share/gem5/configs/example/se.py \
        --cmd=./sw-riscv64 \
        --options="-p TGATTGTACCAAA TGATCATGTACCA" \
        --cpu-type=O3CPU --ruby

    % grep system.cpu.numCycles m5out-minor-sw/stats.txt
    % grep system.cpu.numCycles m5out-o3-sw/stats.txt

Acknowledgements
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

This work was supported by NSF PPoSS Award #2118709 and NLNet awards for
GNUMes-RISCV and Guix-Riscv64.

[^1]: <https://git.genenetwork.org/guix-bioinformatics/guix-bioinformatics/src/branch/master/gn/packages/virtualization.scm>
[^2]: <https://git.genenetwork.org/guix-bioinformatics/guix-bioinformatics/src/branch/master/gn/packages/static.scm>
[^3]: <https://guix.gnu.org/en/download>

