---
title: "ISC-2018 Vector Architecture Exploration"
date: 2018-05-13T18:51:37-04:00
draft: false
weight: 1000
---

# Vector Architecture Exploration with gem5 (Arm)

## Abstract

The Arm Scalable Vector Extension (SVE) is a key enabling technology to
accelerate HPC and machine learning workloads on future Arm-based
processors. SVE does not set a specific vector length, which is
microarchitecture-specific. This vector-length agnosticism increases
design space complexity and exacerbates the importance of having
flexible and accurate modeling tools.

gem5 is an open-source full-system microarchitectural simulator that is
widely used in academia and industry. Arm is a major contributor to gem5
and has developed and upstreamed many features and models. SVE support
in gem5 is being finalized to be made publicly available to enable users
to simulate multi-core architectures with SVE using Arm-provided timing
models.

This tutorial covers the features of SVE, the trade-offs of designing a
multi-core that uses vectors, and the publicly available tools to model
the performance of such vector architectures, with an emphasis on gem5
with SVE support. In addition to gem5, the tutorial will also cover
other analysis tools for SVE, such as the Arm Instruction Emulator,
which will be made available to the participants through docker images
to provide a quick start in these environments.

## Target Audience

The primary audience are computer architect engineers both in academia
(e.g., graduate students) and in industry who want to learn about the
Arm Scalable Vector Extension (SVE) and the Arm tools for SVE, or are
planning to use gem5 for architecture research, especially if they plan
to explore Arm vector architectures. The tutorial is also expected to be
useful as a high-level introduction to gem5 and how it can be used for
architecture research.

Prerequisites: working knowledge of computer systems, vector
architectures, C++ and Python is recommended.

## Schedule (tentative)

| Topic                                | Time   |
| ------------------------------------ | ------ |
| Introduction                         | 10 min |
| The Arm Scalable Vector Extension    | 30 min |
| Vector Architecture Design and Tools | 30 min |
| Introduction to gem5                 | 15 min |
|  |
| Break                                | 30 min |
| gem5 Basics                          | 45 min |
| gem5 Advanced Features               | 45 min |
| SVE gem5 Simulation                  | 30 min |
| Closing                              | 5 min  |

## Organizers

Tutorial organized by Alex Rico and Jose Joao of Arm
