---
title: "ISCA 2023: gem5 Workshop"
permalink: events/isca-2023
---

We are happy to announce the gem5 Workshop, to be co-located with [ISCA 2023](https://iscaconf.org/isca2023/), in Orlando, Florida.

**We are in Canary 1** near the convention center entrance.

The gem5 Workshop is be an opportunity for members of the gem5 community to give presentations on their contributions to gem5 and gem5-related research.
This year's workshop will start with a 25 minute keynote by Dr. Bobby R. Bruce, titled "gem5 v22, v23 and the future", and will continue with presentations and discussion panels on gem5 topics.

## Key Dates

* ~~Submission deadline:  **April 24th 2023 (AOE)**~~
* ~~Notification of acceptance and time-slot awarded: **May 1st 2023**~~
* ISCA dates: **June 17th to June 21st 2023**
* Workshop date: **June 17th 2023**

## Call for Presentations

**Note:** The deadline for submitting presentations has passed.
This call is kept here for archival purposes.

The gem5 simulator is an open-source platform that enables the modeling and simulation of computer systems at different levels of abstraction, including processor, memory hierarchy, and interconnects.
It is widely used in academia and industry for research, education, and design space exploration.
Now on its 5th iteration, the gem5 Workshop gives community stakeholders a chance to present their contributions and ideas, as well as engage in discussion with the wider community.

In this call we are soliciting presentation proposals from researchers, developers, and practitioners who are using or developing the gem5 simulator.
The workshop will be co-located with [ISCA '23](https://iscaconf.org/isca2023/) (June 17th to 21st, in Orlando, Florida), to be held on **June 17th** as an all-day event.
The goal of the workshop is to give community members an opportunity to share their gem5-related research and insights, exchange ideas, and collaborate on future gem5 development goals.

This year we want to give **anyone** who wishes to an opportunity to present gem5-related topics at the workshop.
As such we are foregoing Program Committee evaluation and will allocate presentation time on what we believe will invoke the most discussion.
In short, as long as a presentation proposal is covering a gem5-related topic, we will allocate a time for it at the workshop.
Ideas and contributions, big or small, are welcome.

Examples of gem5 topics which could be presented include, but are not limited to:

* Improvements made to gem5.
* Simulator research carried out with gem5.
* Proposals for improving gem5.
* Early-stage simulator research ideas (this can be a solicitation for feedback from the community).
* Proposals and comments on gem5 development practices.
* Research concerning gem5 or architecture simulators in a general sense.

To submit a proposal, please send an email to Bobby R. Bruce at [bbruce@ucdavis.edu](mailto:bbruce@ucdavis.edu) with the following:

* Title of the presentation.
* Presenter(s) name and affiliation.
* An attached PDF containing a presentation abstract (A few paragraphs, no more than 1 page).
* [Optional] The presenter(s) website links (this will be published on the event web-page).

Above all else, we will welcome any presentation if it can be justified as being of interest to those who use and develop gem5.

To reward those who have helped improve the project, this year we we will be presenting _gem5 Community Impact Awards_ during this year's workshop.
These awards will be presented to individuals, or groups, who have made significant positive contributions to the gem5 community.
This includes introducing new features, improving the underlying infrastructure, supporting users, and any other contributions which have had substantial impact.
The award will be given for work carried out within a loosely-defined 3-year sliding window meaning that contributions made between 2021 and 2023 will be acknowledged this year.
Nominations for the award can be submitted via email to Bobby R. Bruce at [bbruce@ucdavis.edu](mailto:bbruce@ucdavis.edu) (self-nominations will be accepted).

**Key Dates**:

* Submission deadline:  **April 24th 2023 (AOE)**
* Notification of acceptance and time-slot awarded: **May 1st 2023**
* ISCA dates: **June 17th to June 21st 2023**
* Workshop date: **June 17th 2023**

We look forward to receiving your proposals and seeing you at the gem5 Workshop!

## Room and Venue

The workshop will be held in the **Canary 1**  room of the [Marriott World Center Orlando](https://www.marriott.com/hotels/travel/mcowc-orlando-world-center-marriott/).

## Schedule

| --- | --- | ----| --- | --- |
| Time slot | Event / Presentation title | Work By | Affiliation(s) | Slides |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 9:00 - 9:25 | Welcome and Keynote: gem5 v22, v23 and the future | Bobby R. Bruce | University of California, Davis | [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/gem5-workshop-23-welcome.pdf), [PPTX](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/gem5-workshop-23-welcome.pptx) |
| 9:25 - 9:40 | Closing the Gap: Improving the Accuracy of gem5's GPU Models | Vishnu Ramadas, Daniel Kouchekinia, Ndubuisi Osuji, and Matthew D. Sinclair  | University of Wisconsin, Madison | [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/closing-the-gap.pdf), [PPTX](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/closing-the-gap.pptx) |
| 9:40 - 10:05 | Looppoint in the gem5 Simulator | Zhantong Qiu | University of California, Davis | [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/looppoint-in-the-gem5-simulator.pdf) |
| 10:05 - 10:20 | Sustainable gem5 Simulations | Mohammad Alian | University of Kansas | [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/sustainable-gem5-simulations.pdf) |
| 10:20 - 10:35 | Far Atomic Memory Operations in gem5 | Victor Soria-Pardos | Barcelona Supercomputing Center | [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/far-atomic-memory-operations-in-gem5.pdf) |
| 10:35 - 11:00 | Towards a hardware codelet program execution model for heterogeneous chiplet-based system simulation | Dawson Fox, Jose M. Monsalve Diaz, and Xiaoming Li | University of Delaware/Argonne National Laboratory | [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/a-gem5-implementation-of-the-codelet-model.pdf), [PPTX](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/a-gem5-implementation-of-the-codelet-model.pptx) |
| 11:00 - 11:20 | Coffee Break | --- | --- | --- |
| 11:20 - 12:30 | Panel Session: "The Future of gem5" | --- | --- | --- |
| 12:30 - 14:00 | Lunch Break | --- | --- | --- |
| 14:00 - 14:25 | Modern front-end support in gem5 | Bhargav Reddy Godala | Princeton University | [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/modern-front-end-support-in-gem5.pdf), [PPTX](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/modern-front-end-support-in-gem5.pptx) |
| 14:25 - 14:40 | Improving gem5's GPUFS Support | Vishnu Ramadas, Matthew Poremba, Bradford M. Beckmann, and Matthew D. Sinclair | University of Wisconsin, Madison/AMD Research | [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/improving-gem5s-gpufs-support.pdf), [PPTX](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/improving-gem5s-gpufs-support.pptx) |
| 14:40 - 14:55 | What not to do when simulating large workloads! | Maryam Babaie, Ayaz Akram, and Jason Lowe-Power | University of California, Davis | [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/what-not-to-do-when-simulating-large-workloads.pdf) |
| 14:55 - 15:30 | Lightening Talks and Poster Session | --- | --- | --- |
| 15:30 - 16:00 | Coffee Break | --- | --- | --- |
| 16:00 - 16:15 | Analyzing the benefits of more complex cache replacement policies in modern GPU LLCs | Jarvis Jia and Matthew D. Sinclair | University of Wisconsin, Madison | [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/analyzing-the-benefits-of-more-complex-cache.pdf), [PPTX](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/analyzing-the-benefits-of-more-complex-cache.pptx) |
| 16:15 - 16:40 | High performance tracing and visualization for ESL design | Gabriel Busnot and Said Derradji | Arteris IP | --- |
| 16:40 - 17:00 | Closing Remarks and Awards | --- | --- | [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/gem5-workshop-23-closing.pdf), [PPTX](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/slides/gem5-workshop-23-closing.pptx) |
| --- | --- | ----| --- | --- |

## Panel Session

The workshop will feature a panel session titled "The Future of gem5" to be held from **11:20 to 12:30**.
The five panelists, listed in the subsection below, will answer questions posed by the audience, and chairs (Jason Lowe-Power and Bobby R. Bruce), on the future of gem5.

The framing of this panel session will be the progress of gem5 since Jason's ISCA presentation in 2015, “gem5 Horrors and What We Can Do About It", a write-up of which is available at: http://www.lowepower.com/jason/gem5-horrors-and-what-we-can-do-about-it.html.

To start discussions Jason Lowe-Power will remind the panelists and audience of issues highlighted in this his 2015 presentation and the progress made on them.
We will then open the floor to panel and audience to discuss issues that be tackled over the next half-decade of gem5 development.
We wish to find out __what are the horrors of gem5 today, and what can we do about them?__.

We strongly encourage those interested in gem5 and it's future development to attend this session and participate in the discussion.

### Panelists

* **Gabriel Busnot**, Arteris IP
* **Mohammad Alian**, University of Kansas
* **Miquel Moreto**, Barcelona Supercomputing Center
* **Brad Beckmann**, AMD Research
* **Matt Sinclair**, University of Wisconsin, Madison

## Poster Session

The workshop will feature a poster session to start at **14:55**.
This session will begin with a series of lightening talks by our accepted posters (3 minutes each, 1 slide) prior to a traditional poster session held in the same room.

The posters session is immediately before the 15:30 coffee break and may continue into the break if there is sufficient interest.

Those with posters may hang their poster at the start of the workshop (from 9:00) for viewing during the coffee breaks and lunch.

### Accepted Posters

* **Analyzing Google Workload Traces in gem5** by Ayaz Akram, Maryam Babaie, and Jason Lowe-Power (University of California, Davis), [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/posters/analyzing-google-workload-traces-in-gem5.pdf)
* **Octopi-cache: An AMD EPYC-like Three-Level Cache Model in gem5** by Hoa Nguyen and Jason Lowe-Power (University of California, Davis)
* **Improving the Speed of gem5's GPU Regression Tests** by James Braun and Matthew D. Sinclair (University of Wisconsin, Madison)
* **HammerSim: A tool to model RowHammer** by Kaustav Goswami, Ayaz Akram, Hari Venugopalan, and Jason Lowe-Power (University of California, Davis)
* **Validating Hardware and SimPoints with gem5: A RISC-V Board Case Study** by Kunal Pai and Jason Lowe-Power (University of California, Davis), [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/posters/validating-hardware-and-simpoints-with-gem5.pdf)
* **QPoints: QEMU to gem5 ARM** by Bhargav Reddy Godala, Ishita Chaturvedi, Yucan Wu (Princeton University), [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/posters/qpoints.pdf)
* **gem5 Vision** by Parth Shah, Kunal Pai, Harshil Patel, and Arslan Ali (University of California, Davis), [PDF](/assets/files/workshop-isca-2023/posters/gem5-vision.pdf)
