---
title: "ISCA 2020: Learning gem5 Tutorial and gem5 Users' Workshop"
layout: toc
permalink: events/isca-2020
---
* TOC
{:toc}

**Update on the gem5 Tutorial:** The gem5 tutorial will be postponed.
We are planning to hold an online class this summer.
Stay tuned and subscribe to the [gem5-users](https://lists.gem5.org/postorius/lists/gem5-users.gem5.org/) and [gem5-announce](https://lists.gem5.org/postorius/lists/gem5-announce.gem5.org/) mailing list for more information.

## 3rd gem5 Users' Workshop (The first virtual version!)

**Wednesday, June 3rd 12:00 PM – 2:00 PM (EDT/New York), 9:00 AM (PDT/San Francisco), 18:00 (CEST/Brussels), Thu 00:00 (CST/Beijing)**

**Thursday, June 4th 10:00 AM – 11:00 AM (EDT/New York), 7:00 AM (PDT/San Francisco), 16:00 (CEST/Brussels), 22:00 (CST/Beijing)**

The gem5 workshop will bring together the gem5 community to discuss their current work using and improving gem5.
The workshop will include a number of community-contributed talks, and a town hall to discuss the recent changes in gem5 and announcing the first stable version of gem5, gem5-20.

The workshop will be held over two days, June 3rd and 4th, for about two hours each day.
The first day will feature community-contributed presentations and Q&As.
The second day will be a community townhall-style event to gather feedback from the community on the past, present and future of gem5.

[Please register for the workshop via EventBrite](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/gem5-workshop-with-isca-2020-tickets-105893911540)

*Note: You are not required to register for ISCA to register for this workshop.*

You will receive an email via the registration with details on how to join the interactive Zoom webinar.
Additionally by registering, it will help us track the number of people that will be joining.

### Community contributions

We have 10 exciting contributed presentations.
Each presentation will be available via YouTube about a week before the workshop.
In addition to a video, each presenter has been invited to write a short blog post.
We will be publishing the blog posts and videos ~2/day leading up to the workshop.
We will be providing the links to the blog posts and videos below.

During the interactive sessions on Wednesday June 3rd, the presenters will be available for short Q&A's on their work.
Like the main ISCA presentations, each presenter will have a 10 minute slot to give a quick 2 minute pitch on their work followed by a Q&A.
The agenda for the Q&A is shown [below](#draft-agenda-for-workshop).

### gem5 Town hall

On Thursday June 4th, we will host a gem5 community town hall.
This town hall will begin with an introduction and short keynote from Jason Lowe-Power on gem5-20 and the future of gem5.
Then, we will have a set of discussion topics to solicit feedback from the broader community.

*We want to hear from you!*
Please join the town hall no matter what your experience with gem5 is.
We would love to hear both things that are going well with your gem5 experience as well as what can be improved.
This is an exciting opportunity to be able to *see* and interact with others in the gem5 community!

### Workshop schedule **June 3rd**

**The below is stated in UTC time.**
* EDT = UTC-4 (12PM noon start).
* PDT = UTC-7 (9AM start).
* Central European Summer Time = UTC+2 (6PM start).
* China Standard Time = UTC+8 (12AM midnight start).

**Each presenter will be given 10 minutes max. If presenters finish their
pitch and Q&A in under 10 minutes, the next presenter will start. Therefore,
this schedule should be viewed as an order of presentation and only a rough
guide for presentation start times.**

| Time        | Event                        | Authors (presenter in bold)|
|:-----------:|:-----------------------------|:---------------------------|
|1600 -- 1610 | Introduction to the workshop | **Jason Lowe-Power**|
|1610 -- 1620 | A Modular and Secure System Architecture for IoT | **Nils Asmussen**|
|1620 -- 1630 | Memory controller updates for new DRAM technologies, NVM interfaces and flexible memory topologies | **Wendy Elsasser**, Nikos Nikoleris|
|1630 -- 1640 | HeteroGarnet - A Detailed Simulator for Diverse Interconnect Systems | **Srikant Bharadqaj**, Jieming Ying, Bradford Beckmann, Tushar Krishna|
|1640 -- 1650 | Heterogeneous systems modeling with Adaptive Traffic Profiles | Matteo Andreozzi, **Frances Conboy**, Giovanni Stea, Raffaele Zippo|
|1650 -- 1700 | Enabling Multi-GPU Support in gem5 | **Bobbi Winema Yogatama**, Matthew Sinclair, Michael Swift|
|1700 -- 1710 | gem5 GUI | **Shivam Desai**, Rohit Dhamankar, Ravishdeep Singh, Ahmed Farooqui, Jason Lowe-Power, Bobby R. Bruce|
|1710 -- 1720 | Towards full-system discrete GPU simulation | Mattew Porembra, Alexandru Dutu, Gaurav Jain, Pouya Fotouhi, Michael Boyer, Bradford M. Beckmann|
|1720 -- 1730 | gem5art: Zen and the Art of gem5 Experiments | **Ayaz Akram**, Mahyar Samani, Hoa Nguyen, Krithiga Murugavel, Trivikram Reddy, Marjan Fariborz, Pouya Fotouhi, Jason Lowe-Power|
|1730 -- 1740 | Modeling Modern GPU Applications in gem5 | Kyle Roarty, **Matthew Sinclair** |
|1740 -- 1750 | Implementation of a flexible cache coherency protocol for the Ruby memory system | **Tiago Muck**, Pedro Benedicte|
|1750 -- 1800 | Workshop wrap-up | **Jason Lowe-Power** |

### Workshop schedule **June 4th**

**The below is stated in UTC time.**
* EDT = UTC-4 (10AM start).
* PDT = UTC-7 (7AM start).
* Central European Summer Time = UTC+2 (4PM start).
* China Standard Time = UTC+8 (10PM start).

| Time        | Event                        | Discussion Leader |
|:-----------:|:-----------------------------|:------------------|
|1400 -- 1420 | Introduction and gem5-20     | Jason Lowe-Power  |
|1420 -- 1450 | General gem5 discussion      | Jason Lowe-Power  |
|1450 --      | Other discussions to be announced soon |  |

### Call for presentations

The gem5 community is excited to announce the 3rd gem5 Users’ workshop held in conjunction with ISCA 2020 in Valencia, Spain. The goal of the workshop is to provide a forum to discuss what is going on in the community, how we can best leverage each other's contributions, and how we can continue to make gem5 a successful community-supported simulation framework. The workshop will be a half day in the afternoon of May 30.

The workshop will follow a half-day ["Learning gem5" tutorial](https://www.gem5.org/events/isca-2020).

The workshop will include a keynote presentation "RE-gem5 and gem5-20: Past, Present, and Future of the gem5 Community Infrastructure."

We invite the gem5 community to submit abstracts (1-2 paragraphs) for short presentations. The scope of this workshop is broadly the gem5 user and development community. Topics of interest include:

* New features added to gem5
* New models added to gem5
* Extensions and integrations with other simulators
* Experience using gem5
* Validation of gem5 models

We encourage accepted presentations to post a full paper to arXiv or other archival repository in order to give other users a citable source for your contribution. These sources may be cited in future gem5 release notes.

Please submit your abstracts via this [Google Form](https://forms.gle/UnpFXRvpLEFKJBb46). The deadline to submit an abstract is April 10th and we will send notifications by April 14th before the ISCA early registration deadline (April 16th). Due to the close proximity to other deadlines/conferences and the early registration deadline, there will not be any extension.

Form for abstract submission: <https://forms.gle/UnpFXRvpLEFKJBb46>

More information can be found on the gem5 website: <https://www.gem5.org/events/isca-2020>
Looking forward to seeing you in Valencia!

## COVID-19 Update April 8th

ISCA is going to be taking place virtually due to the COVID-19 pandemic. See <https://iscaconf.org/isca2020/> for more information.
On the plus side, we believe this will make the gem5 workshop more inclusive! Rather than limiting attendees to those that can travel to Valencia, anyone will be able to participate!
We are making the following changes to the original call for participation:

1. The deadline for submitting an abstract is now May 1st. You can still use the following link to submit an abstract: <https://forms.gle/UnpFXRvpLEFKJBb46>
2. For accepted abstracts, you will be able to produce a short video and a blog post for the gem5 blog. In the week leading up to the workshop, we will advertise all of the accepted works.
3. We will hold a synchronous virtual Q&A session (or sessions) during the week of June 1st (the original time when ISCA was scheduled). During these session(s), we will ask the authors of the accepted works to attend to encourage discussion with the broader gem5 community. Specific times for these will be announced soon. We will work with the community to choose a time that is inclusive to those in different time zones.

## gem5 Workshop and Tutorial with ISCA 2020

In conjunction with [ISCA 2020](https://www.iscaconf.org/isca2020/), we will be holding a [gem5 Tutorial](#learning-gem5-tutorial) and [Workshop](#3rd-gem5-users-workshop-afternoon) on May 30th in Valencia, Spain.
In the morning, we will be running a Learning gem5 Tutorial, and in the afternoon we will have a gem5 users' workshop.
The workshop will begin with a keynote detailing the recent changes in gem5 and announcing the first stable version of gem5, gem5-20.
The workshop will also include a number of community-contributed talks.
[See below](#call-for-presentations) for details on how to submit an abstract for a talk.

*Note: You are not required to register for ISCA to register for this workshop.*
~~We hope to see you in Valencia!~~

## Learning gem5 Tutorial

**Postponed due to virtulization of ISCA.**
We are planning to hold an online class this summer.
Stay tuned and subscribe to the [gem5-users](https://lists.gem5.org/postorius/lists/gem5-users.gem5.org/) and [gem5-announce](https://lists.gem5.org/postorius/lists/gem5-announce.gem5.org/) mailing list for more information.

This tutorial builds off of [Learning gem5](/documentation/learning_gem5/introduction) and will introduce architecture researchers to the inner workings of gem5.
The goal of the tutorial is not to introduce attendees to every feature of gem5, but to give them a framework to succeed when using gem5 in their future research.

This tutorial is perfect for beginning graduate students or other computer architecture researchers to get started using one of the architecture communities most popular tool.

### Preparing for the tutorial

To get the most out of this tutorial, you are encouraged to bring a laptop to work along. This will be an interactive tutorial, with many coding examples. Additionally, by bringing a laptop, you will be able to easily participate in the afternoon coding sprint.

While this tutorial is appropriate for you even if you've never used gem5 before, you'll get more out of it if you familiarize yourself with gem5 before coming. Specifically, by downloading gem5 and making sure it builds on your system you will save yourself a lot of time. Reading and completing the [first chapter from Learning gem5](http://www.gem5.org/documentation/learning_gem5/part1/building/) before coming to the tutorial is strongly encouraged.

### Audience

The primary audience is computer architecture researchers that wish to learn how to use gem5, one of the architecture communities most popular and powerful simulators
This includes junior computer architecture researchers (e.g., first or second year graduate students) who are planning on using gem5 for future architecture research.
We also invite others who want a high-level idea of how gem5 works and its applicability to architecture research.

## Schedule

### Learning gem5 8:30 – 10:00

* What is gem5 and history
* Getting started with gem5
  * Overall (software) architecture of gem5
  * Compiling gem5
  * Simple introduction script
  * First time running gem5
  * Interpreting gem5's output
  * Simple assembly example to show debug trace of everything
* Extending gem5
  * Structure of C++ code
  * Writing a simple SimObject
* BREAK
  * Discrete event simulation programming
  * SimObject parameters
  * gem5 memory system
  * Overview of simple cache implementation
* Quick overview of other gem5 topics
  * Overview of full system simulation
  * Briefly gem5's other features
  * gem5 limitations
