---
title: "ISCA 2006"
date: 2018-05-13T18:51:37-04:00
draft: false
weight: 200
---

Using the M5 Simulator ISCA 2006 Tutorial Sunday June 18th, 2006

## Introduction

This half-day tutorial will introduce participants to the [M5 simulator
system](Main_Page "wikilink"). M5 is a modular platform for computer
system architecture research, encompassing system-level architecture as
well as processor microarchitecture.

We will be releasing version 2.0 of M5 in conjunction with this
tutorial. Features new in 2.0 include:

  - Multiple ISA support (Alpha, MIPS, and SPARC)
  - An all-new, execute-in-execute out-of-order SMT CPU timing model,
    with no SimpleScalar license encumbrance
  - All-new, message-oriented interface for memory system objects,
    designed to simplify the development of non-bus interconnects
  - More extensive Python integration and scripting support

Because the primary focus of the M5 development team has been simulation
of network-oriented server workloads, M5 incorporates several features
not commonly found in other simulators.

  - Full-system simulation using unmodified Linux 2.4/2.6, HP Tru64 5.1,
    or [L4Ka::Pistachio](http://l4ka.org/projects/pistachio)) (Alpha
    only at this time... coming in the future for MIPS and SPARC)
  - Detailed timing of I/O device accesses and DMA operations
  - Accurate, deterministic simulation of multiple networked systems
  - Flexible, script-driven configuration to simplify specification of
    complex multi-system configurations
  - Included network workloads such as Apache, NAT, and NFS
  - Support for storing results from multiple simulations in a unified
    database (e.g. MySQL) for automated reporting and graph generation

M5 also integrates a number of other desirable features, including
pervasive object orientation, multiple interchangeable CPU models, an
event-driven memory system model, and multiprocessor capability.
Additionally, M5 is also capable of application-only simulation using
syscall emulation.

M5 is freely distributable under a BSD-style license, and does not
depend on any commercial or restricted-license software.

## Intended Audience

Researchers in academia or industry looking for a free, open-source,
full-system simulation environment for processor, system, or platform
architecture studies. Please register via the
[ISCA 2006](http://www.ece.neu.edu/conf/isca2006) web page.

## Tentative Outline

  - M5 structure
      - Object structure
          - Intro to SimObjects
          - Object builder
          - Configuration language
          - Specialization using C++ templates
          - Object serialization (checkpointing)
      - Events
  - CPU models
      - Simple functional model
      - Detailed out-of-order model
      - Sampling and warm-up support
  - Memory & I/O system overview
      - Cache models
      - Interconnect models (busses, point-to-point networks)
      - Coherence support
      - I/O modeling
          - Programmed I/O (uncached accesses)
          - DMA I/O
      - Ethernet model
          - NIC device models
          - Linux driver
          - Link layer model
  - Full-system modeling
      - Building disk images
      - Console and PAL code
      - Running benchmarks via system init scripts
      - Target kernel introspection support
  - Statistics
      - Built-in statistics types
      - Adding new statistics
      - Using the database back end
          - Setting up a results database
          - Using scripts to generate reports and graphs from the
            database
  - Debugging techniques
      - Built-in debugging support
          - Tracing
          - Runtime checking
          - Gdb hooks
      - Debugging target code (including kernels) using remote gdb
  - ISA description language
      - Adding your own instructions to the ISA
      - Adding support for new ISAs

## Speakers

  - Steven K. Reinhardt is an associate professor in the EECS Department
    at the University of Michigan, and a principal developer of M5. He
    received a BS from Case Western Reserve University and an MS from
    Stanford University, both in electrical engineering, and a PhD in
    computer science from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. While at
    Wisconsin, he was the principal developer of the Wisconsin Wind
    Tunnel parallel architecture simulator.

<!-- end list -->

  - Nathan L. Binkert received his Ph.D. candidate from the EECS
    Department at the University of Michigan, and a principal developer
    of M5. He received a BSE in electrical engineering and MS in
    computer science both from the University of Michigan. As an intern
    at Compaq VSSAD, he was a principal developer of the ASIM simulator,
    currently in use at Intel and is currently with Arbor Networks.

<!-- end list -->

  - Ronald G. Dreslinski is a Ph.D. student in the EECS Department at
    the University of Michigan, and a developer of M5's memory system.
    He received a BSE in electrical engineering, a BSE in computer
    engineering, and a MSE in computer science and engineering all from
    the University of Michigan.

<!-- end list -->

  - Kevin T. Lim is a Ph.D. student in the EECS Department at the
    University of Michigan, and the developer of M5's detailed CPU
    model. He received a BSE in computer engineering and an MSE in
    computer science and engineering from the University of Michigan.

<!-- end list -->

  - Ali G. Saidi is a Ph.D. candidate in the EECS Department at the
    University of Michigan, and wrote much of the platform code for
    Linux full-system simulation. He received a BS in electrical
    engineering from the University of Texas at Austin and an MSE in
    computer science and engineering from the University of Michigan.

__NOTOC__
