---
layout: toc
title: "Developer Meetings"
permalink: dev_meetings/
---
* TOC
{:toc}

The Developer Meeting is a recurring monthly event. Its primary purpose is to stay updated on current important matters. Additionally, it provides a platform for discussing ongoing issues and work in progress.

<hr class="hr-shorter">

## February 15th 2024, 5pm UTC
- Meeting agenda: [GitHub discussion](https://github.com/orgs/gem5/discussions/839)

<hr class="hr-shorter">

## January 2024
- Meeting agenda and slides: [GitHub discussion](https://github.com/orgs/gem5/discussions/740)
- Video recording: [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ze4yABgktVE)

<hr class="hr-shorter">

## December 2023
- Meeting agenda and slides: [GitHub discussion](https://github.com/orgs/gem5/discussions/661)
- Video recording: [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VeaoMkDFkvU)

<hr class="hr-shorter">

## November 2023
- Meeting agenda and slides: [GitHub discussion](https://github.com/orgs/gem5/discussions/482)
- Video recording: [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZzCJdtr1mv0)

<hr class="hr-shorter">

## October 2023
- Meeting agenda and slides: [GitHub discussion](https://github.com/orgs/gem5/discussions/435)
- Video recording: [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bfpeo5-5ijI)